---
title: The quest for high quality sound on a Lenovo Yoga C940
date: 2020-07-21
categories:
- System
- Linux
tags:
- pulseaudio
- troubleshooting
- pacmd
- audioquality
- alsa
---
I recently bought a new laptop, a Lenovo C940, and installed Ubuntu 20.04 on it. Everything works grand on it, except for the audio. 
When using Windows, the sound quality was great, however when in Linux, the sound is really tinny and can be harsh to listen to. 
It doesn't matter if I use the speakers or the headphone-jack, both sound the same. 
The strange thing is that when I connect my bluetooth headphones (and use bluetooth A2DP), the sound is absolutely perfect. 
I'm not sure how this works technically, but if I can get bluetooth to work, I should be able to get the same quality normally, right?

Some stats for the machine:
* Model: Lenovo Yoga C940
* OS: Ubuntu 20.04
* Kernel: 5.4.0-40-generic #44-Ubuntu SMP
* Realtek ALC298 (`grep Codec /proc/asound/card0/codec*`)

I have tried fiddling with PulseAudio configuration a lot, but to be honest, it doesn't matter what I do there, the audio quality stays the same.
My pulseaudio config now is this:
```
$ pulseaudio --dump-conf 
### Read from configuration file: /home/iix/.config/pulse//daemon.conf ###
daemonize = no
fail = yes
high-priority = yes
nice-level = -11
realtime-scheduling = yes
realtime-priority = 5
allow-module-loading = yes
allow-exit = yes
use-pid-file = yes
system-instance = no
local-server-type = user
cpu-limit = no
enable-shm = yes
flat-volumes = no
rescue-streams = yes
lock-memory = no
exit-idle-time = 20
scache-idle-time = 20
dl-search-path = /usr/lib/pulse-13.99.1/modules
default-script-file = /etc/pulse/default.pa
load-default-script-file = yes
log-target = 
log-level = notice
resample-method = auto
avoid-resampling = no
enable-remixing = yes
remixing-use-all-sink-channels = yes
remixing-produce-lfe = no
remixing-consume-lfe = no
lfe-crossover-freq = 0
default-sample-format = s16le
default-sample-rate = 44100
alternate-sample-rate = 48000
default-sample-channels = 2
default-channel-map = front-left,front-right
default-fragments = 4
default-fragment-size-msec = 25
enable-deferred-volume = yes
deferred-volume-safety-margin-usec = 8000
deferred-volume-extra-delay-usec = 0
shm-size-bytes = 0
log-meta = no
log-time = no
log-backtrace = 0
rlimit-fsize = -1
rlimit-data = -1
rlimit-stack = -1
rlimit-core = -1
rlimit-rss = -1
rlimit-as = -1
rlimit-nproc = -1
rlimit-nofile = 256
rlimit-memlock = -1
rlimit-locks = -1
rlimit-sigpending = -1
rlimit-msgqueue = -1
rlimit-nice = 31
rlimit-rtprio = 9
rlimit-rttime = 200000
```

I have tried changing `default-sample-format`, `resample-method`, `default-sample-rate` and `alternate-sample-rate` to most sane values that are supported on my machine, from pretty low to super-quality, but I can't hear any difference at all.
I also tried fiddling a little bit with /etc/asound.conf, but I don't really understand that file, so I'm not sure I've done it correctly. Once I set it to
```
# Use PulseAudio plugin hw
pcm.!default {
   type plug
   slave.pcm hw
}

ctl.!default {
  type pulse
  fallback "sysdefault"
}

# vim:set ft=alsaconf:

defaults.pcm.rate_converter "speexrate_best"
```

and restarted, which seems to have disabled pulseaudio, but still sounded the same.

If I open PulseEffects, my "chain" or whatever it's called to be (When running Spotify) looks like this:
🎵 -> s16le,44.1kHz -> F32LE,44.1kHz -> s16le,48.0kHz -> 141ms -> 🔊

I'm unsure if the problem is really in pulseaudio, since if so, I think I should notice a difference when changing the configuration.

Some things I have learned:
* /usr/share/doc/alsa-base/driver/HD-Audio-Models.txt.gz can contain information on drivers for a given sound card. Doesn't for my model though.
* `lshw -c multimedia` gives some nice info on the sound card
* `lspci` / `lspci -v` can give some verbose hardware information
* `pacmd list-sinks` shows pulseaudio sinks with quite detailed information

There is an [ArchWiki page for Lenovo Yoga C940](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Lenovo_Yoga_c940#Audio).
It recommends snd_hda_intel as a sound card driver for my kernel version (Pre 5.5).
The one I use by default is `sof-audio-pci`
The ArchWiki recommends that I add `options snd_hda_intel enable=1 index=1` to /etc/modprobe.d/alsa-base.conf, but if I add that and reboot, I still get the same driver. 
I tried adding `blacklist sof-audio-pci` to /etc/modprobe.d/blacklist.conf, but that did nothing either. 
Only if I add `blacklist snd_sof_pci` does it seem to remove the driver. 
But when I tried that, I lost all sound, and it didn't seems like any driver was active. 
But when I changed the line in /etc/modprobe.d/alsa-base.conf to `options snd-hda-intel dmic_detect=0` instead, it seems like the kernel driver did change. 
Running lshw -c multimedia after that shows configuration: driver=snd_hda_intel latency=32, which is the recommended driver. 
But with that driver, my sound quality is the same as it was when using sof-audio-pci! 
If both snd_hda_intel and sof-audio-pci give the same audio experience, it's probably not the fault of the driver? 

Summary:
- I can switch to another driver (snd-hda-intel) by adding the line `options snd-hda-intel dmic_detect=0` to the end of /etc/modprobe.d/alsa-base.conf, then adding the line `blacklist snd_sof_pci` to the end of /etc/modprobe.d/blacklist.conf and rebooting. But it makes to difference whatsoever (works OK but bad tinny audio with absolutely no bass)
- Setting high quality pulseaudio settings (e.g. `resample-method = soxr-vhq` + `default-sample-format = s24le` + `default-sample-rate = 96000`) and restarting pulseaudio makes no difference to the audio quality, no matter which of the two audio drivers I use.

To make sure it just wasn't something to do with bad equalizing / lack of bass boost, I installed pulseeffects, lsp-plugins and ran `pulseeffects --reset`. Then started pulseeffects and applied bass boost equalization. Instead of adding a lot of bass, this just added a noticeable buzzing sound when bass was supposed to play. When I check one of those VU-meters, it looks like the bass is displayed successfully. Though something prevents it from being sent to the hardware, it seems.

There is seems to be [an open kernel bug](https://bugzilla.kernel.org/show_bug.cgi?id=205755), but seems like it might be on hold. I also think [this redhat bug](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1772498) was a bit interesting to read, but it might be out of date. If I understand it correctly, the lower frequencies are lost because the driver doesn't successfully enable some of the speakers in the sound card, basically acting like a low-pass filter.
