---
title: "Linux command line tools and oneliners"
date: 2022-05-29
categories: "Linux"
tags:
- linux
summary: Few-liners which I'd like to store somewhere
---

Most things today can be done by googling. Do you need to generate a random string? Google for a generator. Need to parse a JWT? Google for a parser.
The problem with both of those cases is that it can be unsuitable to trust random internet pages. So in many cases it's better to use CLI-tools as a default.
So in this page I will try to collect ways of easily doing things in the CLI, preferrably without installing a lot of junk in your system.

## Deleting file with unprintable characters
One example would be if you open vim and then type :w\^Z, where ^Z is created by
holding CTRL and clicking Z.

**1. Run ls -b to check their escaped name** (in my case this will be \032)

    $ ls -b
    \032  policy.rb  upp1.rb

**2. Let echo -e print out the name for you in your command**
```bash
rm $(echo -e "\032")
```

## Fake running program name
```bash
(exec -a 'vim thesis.tex' nethack)
```

## Great links for bash
- [greycat's wiki](http://mywiki.wooledge.org/)
- [Useless Use of Cat Award](http://partmaps.org/era/unix/award.html)

## Generating random strings
```bash
## Use OpenSSL as a randomizer
openssl rand -hex 32
```

## Reading JWT content
If you have jq installed you can finish off by piping it to that.
```bash
jwt=eyJ...

## Using only default tools
cut -d. -f2  <<<"$jwt" | base64 -d

## Using jq
echo "$jwt" | jq -R 'split(".") | .[0:2] | map(@base64d) | map(fromjson)'
```

## Rename multiple files
I have multiple directories with the following format:  
directory.name [word123]  
directory.name1 [word123]  
directory.name2 [word123]  
directory.name3 [word123]  
etc.  
I would like to remove the [word123] from each directory name. It is
unreasonable to perform a mv for each as there are simply too many!
```bash
for r in ./*\ \[word123\]; do mv "$r" "${r%\ \[word123\]}"; done
```

## Sort lines by counting occurances
```bash
| sort | uniq -c | sort -nr
```

## Switch to a fake bash login-shell
```bash
exec -l bash           # If you're in bash:
bash -c 'exec -l bash' # If you're in another shell
```
