---
title: "Recipe - Coconut Chickpea Curry"
date: 2023-01-04
categories:
- Recipe
---

Easy peasy recipe. From [Jessica in the Kitchen](https://jessicainthekitchen.com/coconut-chickpea-curry-recipe/)

## Ingredients
* coconut oil
  - Alternative: rapeseed oil
* 450g of canned chickpeas (i.e. 450g after draining)
* 400g canned coconut milk
  - Alternative: coconut cream
* 400g of fresh tomatoes, you want the sweet, deep red ones
* 1 small lime
* 1 medium red onion or yellow onion
* 3 garlic cloves
* 1½ tablespoons garam masala
* 1 teaspoon curry powder
* ½ teaspoon cumin
* 1-2 chilis
* Some fresh coriander (optional)
* Naan bread (optional)

## Prep
* Peel the garlic
* Slice the onions, I prefer thinly. You can also dice if you want
* Slice the tomatoes, I prefer medium thin. You can also dice if you want
* Slice the chilis
* Drain and rinse the chickpeas under the tap

## Steps
1. Add some oil to a deep pot on medium-high heat.
2. Add onions and tomatoes. You may want to add some ground black pepper and salt.
3. After reaching temperature, lower the heat to medium and let the ingredients simmer for at least 10 minutes. The goal is to soften the onions and reduce the tomatoes.
4. Add in the garlic, chili, garam masala, curry powder and cumin. Stir to combine. The consistency should be paste-like if reduced enough.
5. Add in the chickpeas. Stir to combine.
6. Add in the coconut milk and stir again.
7. Bring the curry to a boil, and then reduce to medium-low so that the mixture continues to simmer for 10 to 12 more minutes.
8. Taste the curry and season with salt and pepper if you desire. 
9. Remove the curry from the heat, allow it to cool slightly and then squeeze a lime lightly over the top of the curry, stirring to combine.
10. Enjoy! Garnish your meal with chili and coriander to taste.
