---
title: "Quality apparel"
date: "2023-10-14"
categories: "Clothes"
tags:
- clothes
summary: A list of quality apparel I like
---

I keep buying clothes and shoes that only lasts a year or two due to wear, and/or fade.
So I've decided to try to write down brands and series that work, so I can stick to them.

## Table

### Good brands to buy from

| Category   | Brands |
|------------|--------|
| Outer wear | Fjällräven > Everest |
| Cotton sweater | Asket |
| Merino sweater | These Glory Days |
| T-shirt | Asket > Levi's > Bläck |
| Trousers | Espirit? |
| Shorts | These Glory Days |
| Underwear & socks | Bläck |
| Casual shoes | Icebug |
| Running shoes| Separate post for this |

### Brands to avoid

| Category | Brand | Comment |
|----------|-------|---------|
| Trousers | East West | Fading colors |
| Trousers | Samsøe & Samsøe | Fading colors |
| Shorts   | Four.ten | Quick fading colors and heavy wear |

## Notes

### Jacket

My criterias:

* Look great
* Great fit
* Should be able to handle the elements for many years
* Must have a great hood
* Many pockets
  - 1-2 outside breast pockets
  - 2 outside hand pockets (+2 extra hand outside pockets for winter jackets)
  - 1-2 inside breast pocket
  - 1-2 inside low pockets

#### Fjällräven - Skogsö Jacket M (Spring/Autumn G-1000 jacket)

Stylish everyday jacket. Protects against some rain and some wind, and is pretty breathable.
Exceptionally good hood. Has all the pockets you would need. Made out of G-1000,
so you can, and should, wax it.

#### Everest - U Icon 3L Jacket (Autumn/Winter hardshell jacket)

Unpadded hardshell jacket, basically a ski jacket. Great for layering, but also pretty much requires additional layers, or it's too cold.
Great pockets, great hood, large pockets which can fit winter gloves and a beanie. Handles even the heaviest rain and also has 
ventilation holes, as well as ventilates very well in general.

Has matching trousers, but they are mostly suited to skiing. I still bought them and added some extra velcro and buttons to make them
work with normal boots, but I wouldn't generally recommend it.

#### Everest - Down Parka (Winter down parka)

Probably as stylish as winter clothes get. Very warm and the hood can handle good weather as well as snowstorms.
Made for sub-zero temperatures, and I'd try to avoid rain.

### Sweater

My criterias:

* High quality fabric
* Should be able to handle many washes at 30°C (unless wool) without changing form or fading

#### Asket - The Cotton Sweater

A classic sweater. Feels somewhat like old school sweaters used for training with. 

#### These Glory Days - Leon merino wool sweater

Stylish and long lasting. I have several of these, and they all still look brand new.

### T-shirts

My criterias:

* High quality fabric
* Should be able to handle many washes at 30°C without changing form or fading.

#### Asket "The T-Shirt"

180g/sqm extra long staple cotton t-shirt. Classic fit and pre-shrunk. 500 SEK each.

#### Levi's 

Got some Levi's t-shirts as a gift with unknown model, but they seem to be of great quality.

#### Bläck

Great and long lasting. About half the price of Asket, but I still eventually replaced mine with Asket.
Not because of any issues per se, just that the Asket ones have an even more premium feel.

### Trousers

My criterias:

* Look great with shirts and sweatshirts
* Great fit
* The color should not fade
* Not tear in the crotch

#### These Glory Days - Bellevue Cotton Shorts (Summer Shorts)

Nice shorts for summer days. They sit quite high at the waist and have a french bearer.
I have these in size 48.

#### WE Fashion - Chinos (Winter Chinos)

Very thick chinos. Great for winter but get sweaty during summer. I have these
in size 31x32, but I think 30x32 would fit better.

### Underwear and socks

My criterias:

* Premium feel
* Durable

#### Bläck

Bläck from MQ has some great tencel/lyocell/modal underwear and socks. A bit pricy but great.

### Shoes

My criterias:

* Very cushioned (my feet are worn out)
* Durable enough to handle daily 1 hour walks
* Need not look great, but should at least look OK (looks are more important for summer than winter)

#### Icebug - ELI RB9X (Summer Low Sneaker)

Great breathable sneakers. Exceptional in summer, but fine in spring and autumn when it doesn't rain.
I have these in size USA 8.5, UK 7.5, EU 41.5, CM 26.5.

#### Icebug - HAZE M RB9X GTX (Spring/Autumn Low Sneakers)

Great all-round shoe that can handle any weather or terrain.
Probably good in the winter as well, but they are too low for snow.
I have these in size USA 9, UK 8, EU 42, CM 27

#### Hanwag - Tatra II Wide GTX (Winter boots)

Very stable, sturdy and warm. Can handle any weather, but you feel about as
nimble in these as you do in your ski boots.


### Hall of Shame

**Trousers' color faded quickly**

* Samsøe & Samsøe
* Four.ten
* East West - Bowery Chinos

**Trousers tore in the crotch**

* Levi's
