---
title: "Boeuf bourguignon"
date: "2024-04-01"
categories: "Recipe"
tags:
- recipe
summary: A classic stew with a savory taste of wine and herbs.
---

From [Allt om mat @ Expressen](https://alltommat.expressen.se/recept/boeuf-bourguignon-recept/).

## Ingredients
* 1kg stew pieces (beef)
* 2 yellow onions
* 4 cloves of garlic
* 2 tablespoons butter (+ 1 tbsp)
* 2 tablespoons salt
* 2 pinches black pepper (freshly ground)
* 2 tablespoons tomato puree
* 4dl Red wine
* 2dl water
* ½dl calf stock
* 2 bay leaves
* 4 twigs of thyme
* 2 twigs of rosemary
* 250g small onions
* 250g mushrooms
* 150g smoked pork

## Prep
* Clean the meat and possibly cut it into smaller pieces.
* Peel and chop the onion .
* Peel and chop the garlic.

## Steps
1. Brown the meat in 2 tablespoons of butter in batches in a frying pan.
2. Season with salt and pepper and place the meat in a pot.
3. Fry the onion in 1 tablespoon of butter until it has a nice color.
4. Add garlic and tomato puree and fry for about 1 minute.
5. Add the onion to the pot.
6. Pour wine, water and stock into the pot and add bay leaves, thyme and rosemary.
7. Bring the pot to a boil and then simmer covered until the meat is tender, about 1 1/2 hours.

## Prep
* Put the small onions in cold water for about 15 minutes and they will be easier to peel.
* Trim and halve the mushrooms if they are large.
* Shred the pork.

## Steps
1. Fry the pork in a frying pan until it has a nice colour, then put in on a
   plate.
2. Fry the small onions and mushrooms in the leftover pork fat until they have a nice colour.
3. Mix the small onions and mushrooms into the pot, simmer for another 15 minutes.
4. Mix the pork into the pot and sprinkle over the thyme and rosemary.
5. Serve with mashed potatoes or baguette and salad.
