---
title: "Running shoes"
date: "2024-08-06"
categories: "Running"
tags:
- running
- 'running shoes'
summary: A list of running shoes I have or might get in the future
---

## Possible future shoes

| Shoe                     | Weight (g) | Drop (mm) | Stack (mm) | Size                             | Price (SEK) |
|--------------------------|------------|-----------|------------|----------------------------------|-------------|
| Puma Velocity NITRO 4    | 247        | 10        | 36         | EU 42                            | 1500        |

## Definitions

| Run type   | Definition |
|------------|------------|
| Easy       | Easy, maintainable and conversational pace. From slow recovery runs to a more steady pace. |
| Tempo      | Aerobic runs from steady to threshold. |
| Long       | Easy or tempo pace for over an hour. |


## Owned shoes

| Name                      | Stack (mm)  | Drop (mm) | Weight (g)  | Run type(s)       | Size                  | Fit       | Rating |
|---------------------------|-------------|-----------|-------------|-------------------|-----------------------|-----------|--------|
| PUMA MagMax NITRO         | 47.0 (42.9) | 8.0 (9.6) | 292         | Easy, Long        | US 9, UK 8, EU 42     | Good      | Great  |
| Adidas Adizero Boston 12  | 37.0 (34.5) | 6.5 (6.1) | 260         | Easy? Tempo? Long | US 8.5, UK 8, EU 42   | Large     | Good   |
| PUMA Deviate Nitro 2      | 38.0 (31.7) | 8.0 (5.6) | 260         | Easy, Tempo, Long | US 9, UK 8, EU 42     | Good      | ?      |
| ASICS Novablast 5         | 41.5 (40.9) | 8.0 (7.4) | 255         | Easy, Tempo, Long | US 8.5, UK 7.5, EU 42 | Snug      | Great  |
| Saucony Endorphin Speed   | 35.5        | 8.0       | 221         | Easy, Tempo, Long | US 9, UK 8, EU 42.5   | Good      | Good   |
| Saucony Endorphin Speed 4 | 38 (36.2)   | 8.0 (8.7) | 237         | Tempo, Long       | US 8.5, UK 7.5 EU 42  | Too small | Great  |
| Saucony Triumph 21        | 39 (39.1)   | 10 (10.5) | 282         | Easy, Tempo       | US 9.5, UK 8.5 EU 43  | Large     | Great  |
| ASICS Gel Cumulus 25      | 37.5 (38.4) | 8.0 (11.2)| 269         | Easy              | US 9, UK 8, EU 42.5   | Good      | Bad    |

### PUMA MagMax NITRO (2025)

- [Stats over att runrepeat.com](https://runrepeat.com/puma-magmax-nitro).

A very premium shoe. The upper is very comfortable, with a really nice, stretchy tongue and laces.
Lots of cushioning and with a stable base, it's obviously more focused on comfort and recovery than nimbleness and speed.
My first run it felt pretty slow, but after getting used to it, it feels alright for most easy runs. 
The stability makes it nice for longer runs, but the weight is noticeable.

All in all it's a great shoe for its use cases. I wouldn't run faster than easy with it. Even steady pace is probably not great.

### Adidas Adizero Boston 12 (2025)

- [Stats over att runrepeat.com](https://runrepeat.com/adidas-adizero-boston-12).

First impressions are not great. The upper is not especially comfortable and the laces are really bad, making it hard to get a good fit.
The sole is extremely stiff, which seems good for the durability, but not great for faster runs. Maybe my weak feet are the problem here though.

After the first 50k, the impression is slightly better. While it's sometimes hard to get a good fit due to the bad upper and laces, the sole is pretty nice.
Stiff midsole with a stable base makes it great for longer runs. However, I'm having a hard time knowing what else it's great for. 
It's a bit too uncomfortable as a daily, and it's still a bit too stiff when running tempo, making it unwieldy. 
But speed-wise it shines somewhere around steady pace.

### PUMA Deviate Nitro 2 (2025)

- [Stats over att runrepeat.com](https://runrepeat.com/puma-deviate-nitro-2).

These shoes seem great, but the low drop combined with the carbon fiber plate causes massive achilles tendon issues for me.
So I have a hard time testing them.

### ASICS Novablast 5 (2024)

- [Stats over att runrepeat.com](https://runrepeat.com/asics-novablast-5).

Comfortable shoe with a very tall stack for a daily. They are outrageously soft and bouncy when new, maybe even uncomfortably bouncy in the heel.
Gets pretty firm in negative degrees though. Then after the next few hundred kilometers, they lose some of their bounce and become more soft and cushioned instead.
I think I prefer the latter, when it's more cushioned than bouncy, since I use it mostly as a daily. 
Depite it being more cushioned than bouncy, the rocker gives it more speed than you would expect. So I actually ran a 10k PB in these.
All in all, it's a great shoe for most runs. It's pretty rare with a shoe which handles everything from recovery to threshold as this shoe does.

Its only negative would be that the foam compresses noticeably. I don't like using it for several days in a row, as the foam flattens a lot.
I would let them rest every other day, with maybe some occasional two days in a row.

### Saucony Endorphin Speed 1 (2024)

Light, springy shoes. Somewhere in between Saucony Triumph 21 and Saucony Endorphin Speed 4. Great for most runs, but not the best for any.

### Saucony Endorphin Speed 4 (2024)

- [Stats over att runrepeat.com](https://runrepeat.com/saucony-endorphin-speed-4).

Too small for me. Should have gone for half a size up.
I could only run short distances in these because of the wrong size, and had to sell them.
Such a shame since they seem great for running faster paces (but hard to run slow in).
They also seem a bit slappy when running.

### Saucony Triumph 21 (2024)

- [Stats over att runrepeat.com](https://runrepeat.com/saucony-triumph-21).

I should have gone for half a size down, but they still fit alright when heel-locked.
Extremely good shoes. Soft and bouncy. Maybe a bit heavy when running for a long time, but I haven't really tested them for long runs.

### ASICS Gel Cumulus 25 (2023)

- [Stats over att runrepeat.com](https://runrepeat.com/asics-gel-cumulus-25).

These shoes are the worst shoes I've ever run in.
They feel sluggish running in them, turning all my runs into easy recovery runs.

## Other shoes

### New Balance FuelCell Rebel v4

I tried a size 42, which was way too short. I probably have 42.5 or 43 in New Balance shoes. 
