---
title: "Golang: In search of lost transitive dependencies"
date: "2024-09-06"
categories: "golang"
tags:
- golang
summary: What is go.mod?
---

When coming from other programming languages, you are often used to using
lock-files. There you have a nice dependency structure with links between
packages and their dependencies, even dependencies for dependencies. This is
very handy when creating a Software Bill of Materials, for license compliance
and for vulnerability scanning.

When coming to Golang, my initial thought was that go.mod and go.sum were
Golang's equivalents to package.json och package.lock. This would mean that
go.sum was the file to use for checking dependencies. But it turns out that
[go.sum is not a lock
file](https://go.dev/wiki/Modules#is-gosum-a-lock-file-why-does-gosum-include-information-for-module-versions-i-am-no-longer-using)
(even if I don't really understand the issue by reading from that link).
Thus, programs like [dependabot only checks go.mod, not
go.sum](https://github.blog/changelog/2023-03-07-dependency-graph-removes-go-sum-support/).

But here is an example scenario which I find problematic:

- An example application uses `github.com/99designs/gqlgen` as a dependency
- gqlgen has `andybalholm/cascadia` as an indirect dependency
- cascadia does not show up in my application's go.mod as an indirect
  dependency. It only shows up in go.sum.
- Thus, vulnerabilities in cascadia will not show up in dependabot

This seems like a big hole in the dependency graph. It have tried to understand
how that can be, and the answer seems to be [module graph
pruning](https://go.dev/ref/mod#graph-pruning). To quote what a dude called Jeff
[wrote in the discussion thread which ended up in dependabot removing go.sum as
a source
file](https://github.com/dependabot/dependabot-core/issues/4740#issuecomment-1042439690)

> Now with 1.17, those `indirect` deps that that would be discovered by walking the dep tree, but aren't actually used in the final binary, get pruned out of the list in `go.mod`.
> And then the remaining `// indirect` deps are listed in `go.mod` (previously they were optional).
> So now `go.mod` can be treated as a definitive source of "here's all the packages that are required in the final binary, w/o having to walk the dep tree".

So allegedly, Golang does a good enough job of removing redundant dependencies
that this should not be an issue. It does not seems obvious to me how that is
handled between different build-tags and so on, but if dependabot trusts go.mod
as a complete list of dependencies, then that is probably good enough.
