---
title: "Stir-Fried Crispy Beef"
date: "2024-11-12"
categories: "Recipe"
tags:
- recipe
summary: From Jamie Oliver
---

From https://www.jamieoliver.com/recipes/beef/asian-crispy-beef/

## Ingredients

* 1 tablespoon unsalted peanuts
* 2 cloves of garlic
* 5cm piece of ginger
* sesame oil
* 2 star anise
* 200g lean minced beef
* 1 teaspoon runny honey
* 1 teaspoon fish sauce
* 1 teaspoon low-salt soy sauce
* 2 limes
* 150g brown rice noodles
* 2 spring onions
* 1 fresh red chilli
* 200g fresh mixed salad veg, such as round lettuce, carrot, radishes, cress, spinach
* 4 sprigs of fresh coriander

## Steps

1. Lightly toast the peanuts in a dry frying pan, then crush in a pestle and mortar and put aside. Peel and finely chop the garlic and ginger.
2. Put 1 tablespoon of sesame oil and the star anise into the frying pan on a medium-high heat. Add the mince, breaking it apart with a wooden spoon, followed by half the garlic and ginger and the honey. Stir-fry for 5 minutes to crisp up and get golden brown.
3. Meanwhile, crush the remaining garlic and ginger into a paste in the pestle and mortar, then muddle in the fish and soy sauces and lime juice to make a dressing.
4. Cook the noodles according to the packet instructions.
5. Trim the spring onions, then finely slice with the chilli (deseed if you like). Prep the salad veg, breaking the lettuce leaves apart and matchsticking or finely slicing any crunchy veg so it’s all a pleasure to eat.
6. Load up your plates with that lovely salad veg, then drain and add the noodles. Spoon over the dressing, sprinkle over the crispy beef, chilli, spring onions and crushed peanuts, pick over the coriander leaves and tuck in.


