---
title: "Linux command line workflow"
date: "2025-11-21"
categories: "Linux"
tags:
- linux
summary: "Using the command line in 2025"
---

## What packages should I install

  * bat
  * delta
  * fzf
  * fzf-git
  * kube.fzf
  * nvim
  * rg (ripgrep)
  * rg.fzf
  * z


## Bat

Bat is something or a `cat` and `less` replacement. Making files more readable and adding some color.
Either run `bat <filename>` or `<stuff> | bat`.

## Delta

Delta is a diff-tool. I mainly use it for git.

After installing you can set the pager in your git config.

```bash
git config --global core.pager delta
```

I have the following in my .bashrc:

```bash
if type delta &> /dev/null; then
    export DELTA_FEATURES="+side-by-side hyperlinks"
fi
```

## fzf

fzf is a command-line fuzzy finder. It's great to integrate with other tools in order to eliminate terminal noise.

After installing it you should add it to your zshrc/bashrc:

```bash
if type fzf &> /dev/null; then
    if [[ -n ${BASH_VERSION} ]]; then
        eval "$(fzf --bash)"
    elif [[ -n ${ZSH_VERSION} ]]; then
        source <(fzf --zsh)
    fi
fi
```

## fzf-git

An extension for git and fzf. Gives the following shortcuts:

    * CTRL-G ? to show this list
    * CTRL-G CTRL-F for Files
    * CTRL-G CTRL-B for Branches
    * CTRL-G CTRL-T for Tags
    * CTRL-G CTRL-R for Remotes
    * CTRL-G CTRL-H for commit Hashes
    * CTRL-G CTRL-S for Stashes
    * CTRL-G CTRL-L for reflogs
    * CTRL-G CTRL-W for Worktrees
    * CTRL-G CTRL-E for Each ref (git for-each-ref)

### Terminal shortcuts

    * ALT-C is a fuzzy `cd`
    * CTRL-R is replaced with a fzf version.
    * CTRL-T is a fuzzy file finder (see below)
    * `**<TAB>` in terminal is replaced with a fuzzy search

Regarding fuzzy file finder:
If you're in a folder and want to use `nvim <filename>` but the file might be in a subfolder, you can type `nvim ^T` where ^T is Ctrl + T.
Then you can select your file, which will add its path to the commandline after nvim. Then you can press enter.
Note that pressing <TAB> and <SHIFT>+<TAB> selects and unselects so you can select several files.


#### Adding fuzzy finding to scripts
[Read the official homepage](https://junegunn.github.io/fzf/getting-started/)
